Document GPU configuration flow across pipelines, modules, and profiles (#4352)
nf-core/website: sites/docs/src/content/docs/developing/components/gpu-modules.md

:::

:::info{title="Why modules check task.accelerator directly" collapse}
A module reads `task.accelerator{:groovy}` itself so one implementation can serve both CPU and GPU
execution paths — switching container, binary, or command arguments per task, as
[`ribodetector`](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/tree/master/modules/nf-core/ribodetector) does.

This is only about _how_ detection happens, not _whether_ GPU use is on by default — that's the
pipeline's decision. Some pipelines opt users in under a `gpu` profile; others require an explicit parameter.
:::

Pipelines also set GPU container flags via `containerOptions` in their process config.
Use `containerOptions` (not global `docker.runOptions`) to scope GPU flags to GPU processes only.

:::note{title="How a GPU request reaches the scheduler" collapse}

A module only ever reads `task.accelerator`; it never decides when a GPU is actually available.
That decision flows through several configuration layers before it reaches the module:

1. **The module** checks `task.accelerator` to pick a container/binary and reads `task.accelerator.request` for the GPU count (this page).

> 2. **The pipeline's `conf/base.config`** assigns a global default to the processes with `label 'process_gpu'{:groovy}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **The pipeline's `conf/base.config`** assigns a global default to the processes with `label 'process_gpu'{:groovy}` (requires use of the `gpu` profile).
```

Modules detect whether a GPU has been requested with `task.accelerator{:groovy}`.
A module never sets the `accelerator` directive itself; the pipeline controls GPU allocation by setting `accelerator = 1{:groovy}` in its process config (for example, via a `process_gpu` label or a `withName` block).

:::note{title="accelerator is a map"}
The [`accelerator{:groovy}` directive](https://docs.seqera.io/nextflow/reference/process#accelerator) is a map with `request` and `type` keys.
`accelerator = 1{:groovy}` is shorthand for `accelerator = [request: 1]{:groovy}`.

> Modules only ever need `task.accelerator.request{:groovy}` — the GPU count, the same role `task.cpus{:groovy}` plays for cores.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modules only ever need `task.accelerator.request{:groovy}` (the GPU count). It serves the same role `task.cpus{:groovy}` does for CPU cores.
```

`task.accelerator.type{:groovy}` (the GPU model, e.g. `'nvidia-tesla-a100'`) is infrastructure-specific: it is set by an institutional profile or a user's local config, never hardcoded by a pipeline or module.
:::

:::info{title="Why detection lives in the module, not a label"}
Placing GPU allocation in the pipeline config lets users control it through their pipeline config or profiles.

> A label-only alternative (e.g., requiring a `process_gpu` label) would not work for modules that support both CPU and GPU modes, such as [`ribodetector`](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/tree/master/modules/nf-core/ribodetector), so the choice is left to the pipeline author.

Reviewer: I wonder if this text could be improved, it reads as misleading as it stands. Possibly also needs a PR for the (I think 5) modules that are CPU + GPU capable.

My reading of it is it _would work_ to use a label, but it's currently just a decision to have these modules default to CPU, even when the `gpu` profile is used. GPU opt-in is required right now.

In my view it would not be unreasonable to default to GPU with the `gpu` profile and CPU without. In a mixed pipeline developers would just need to opt-out for specific processes: `task.accelerator` `null` using `withName`.

Author: I thought this was ok, but admittedly it took me a bit to wrap my head around what it meant, so adjusting the wording is probably a good call.

Pipelines also set GPU container flags via `containerOptions` in their process config.
Use `containerOptions` (not global `docker.runOptions`) to scope GPU flags to GPU processes only.

## How a GPU request reaches the scheduler

A module only ever reads `task.accelerator`; it never decides when a GPU is actually available.
That decision flows through several configuration layers before it reaches the module:

1. **The module** checks `task.accelerator` to pick a container/binary and reads `task.accelerator.request` for the GPU count (this page).
2. **The pipeline's `conf/base.config`** tags the process with `label 'process_gpu'{:groovy}` (or targets it with `withName`).
3. **The pipeline's `conf/modules.config`** sets the default allocation, typically `accelerator = 1{:groovy}`, on that label or process name — often behind a pipeline parameter (for example, `accelerator = { params.use_gpu_ribodetector ? 1 : null }{:groovy}`) so users can opt in without needing a separate profile.

> 4. **An institutional profile** (from [nf-core/configs](https://github.com/nf-core/configs)) intercepts `task.accelerator` inside a `clusterOptions` closure and translates it into the local scheduler's syntax, for example `--gres=gpu:${task.accelerator.request}{:groovy}` on SLURM. This is also where a site defines `task.accelerator.type{:groovy}` (which GPU model a request maps to on that cluster) and where `containerOptions` gets the runtime-specific flag (`--nv`, `--gpus all`) scoped to the same label. See [Writing process configuration](/docs/developing/institutional-profiles/configuration#process-scope) for the pattern institutional profiles use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **An institutional profile** (from [nf-core/configs](https://github.com/nf-core/configs)) intercepts `task.accelerator` and applies it to the resources requested - e.g. a `slurm` executor would typically use a `clusterOptions` closure to translate the request into the local scheduler's syntax (including considering `task.accelerator.type` if appropriate) and `containerOptions` to provide needed runtime options, whereas  for example a Kubernetes setup should use `accelerator` automatically and e.g. a cloud VM executor might use the machine type to supply the needed resources. See [Writing process configuration](/docs/developing/institutional-profiles/configuration#process-scope) for the pattern institutional profiles use.
```
